Lecture #2

In the last lecture, I noted that "Making meaning is something I will refer to often in this course. Essentially, I want to point you in the direction of analysis rather than synopsis. Often, we discuss the plot events of literary texts, or other cultural phenomena, as a way of trying to understand them. Discussing plot events is really about comprehension, which is something we need to do but that we need to move on from quite quickly."

Here's some clarification: 

The [readings](http://digitalcultureslab.ca/douglascollege-online1102/winter2017/course-schedule-and-readings-full/) for this week focus on figurative language or, terminology we need in order to discuss the higher order of signification that language can create. The bottom line is that interpretation, as far as this class is concerned, involves two stages: 1) read for comprehension; 2) read for symbolic, metaphoric, or imagistic meaning. 

You might remember in high school being taught things such as simile or metaphor. Simile is easy to remember for most--it's a comparison using "like" or "as." When you read a simile, try to pay attention to how the comparison using like or as is constructed. What is being compared to what, and then how is one thing "like" another? If you read that a character "stands tall like a tree," then you need to think about the specific qualities that a tree has which are transferred onto that character. It's not enough to simply point to the simile, we need to explain how it works and why is it--or isn't--effective. Let's look at a few examples from Chapters 1 - 3 of *Mr. Penumbra's 24-Hour Bookstore*.

“The whole economy suddenly felt like a game of musical chairs, and I was convinced I needed to grab a seat, any seat, as fast as I could.”

- Here the comparison is pretty straightforward. The economy is unstable and you need to grab anything you can get. What's important for us to emphasize is how one needs to know how to play musical chairs--so there's some Western cultural knowledge needed to understand the comparison. At the same time, the nature of the comparison refers to a children's game suggesting that Clay is not a deep thinker--he tends to express himself through simple comparisons--not that there's anything wrong with this. Finally, the comparison also reveals much about the anxieties this character is feeling and hints at his need for stability and his tendency to be self-centred in his outlook. In short, there's a lot to be taken from the simile. 

“The shelves were packed close together, and it felt like I was standing at the border of a forest—not a friendly California forest, either, but an old Transylvanian forest, a forest full of wolves and witches and dagger-wielding bandits all waiting just beyond moonlight’s reach.”

- Let's do the stages. Stage 1 (the literal or reading for comprehension stage): The narrator (Clay) is comparing the shelves of the bookstore to a forest. It's important to note here that I didn't write "bookstore," but "shelves." That he focuses on the shelves is an important distinction. The comparison here is double-edged: it's both simile and metaphor (more on that later). I'm not "reading into" the simile yet. I'm just getting clear on what is being compared to what. To focus on the simile, we need to be precise about what is being compared: shelves and a forest. Stage 2: the shelves are the kind of forest that one wouldn't want to enter into--a scary forest, one with a lot of references to horror images or fairly-tale images (Dracula, wolves, witches, daggers). The simile then relies on what I know of such horror or fairy-tale things, and how I know they are there to teach us something and that they themselves often mean more than what's on the surface (and there's the metaphor bit I'll get to in a moment). In sum, the simile here works to show us how intimidated Clay is about reading what's on the shelf, how he again emphasizes a child-like approach to expressing his emotions--wolves, scary monsters, dark forests. We're building an understanding of his character through these similes.      

“The perfect independent bookstore, like Pygmalion in Berkeley.”

- Here's a direct comparison that allows us to visualize the bookstore as a whole: "Pygmalion" Have you looked this up on Google? Does it exist? What's really important is to see how we again, like in the example above have a reference to California. A lot of the similes are built around a knowledge of California, which contains not only "friendly forests" but also "perfect independent bookstores." Point is, California seems to be a place that Clay sees as a "safe space," somewhere he thinks is not scary and that he feels comfortable with--which tells us something about his worldview.  

“Every night I take his place, and we nod farewell like soldiers—like men who uniquely understand each other’s circumstances.”

- Think carefully about the implications of this simile: how do soldiers nod farewell? What does this mean? Are they going to die? Is there an army somewhere? How does this simile foreshadow or imply something about the relationship between characters? 

---

Ok, metaphor. Metaphor was famously defined, probably by Aristotle but who knows, as *finding the similar in the dissimilar*. Some like to see metaphor as simply a comparison that does not rely on "like" or "as." Problem is that, as noted above, some metaphors shelter a related or unrelated simile within them. Anyway you want to look at it, when something represents something other than the literal meaning, it's a metaphor or symbol or it's ironic. Point is, you should look at it and contemplate. 

"The boat plows through the water" is a good example of a metaphor. The *plow* belongs on land, the *boat* in the water (the dissimilar), but the "similarity" of the action ("plowing") creates a vivid image of what's happening. If we look at the forest described above, "not a friendly California forest, either, but an old Transylvanian forest, a forest full of wolves and witches and dagger-wielding bandits all waiting just beyond moonlight’s reach," we can decipher the metaphor(s) at work. The qualities of this forest speak to fears--both reasonable and unreasonable--but they are not literal fears--a bookshelf is not a forest, scary or otherwise. At the same time though, the metaphor speaks to Clay's unreasonable, child-like fear or books. Remember, we're talking about a time when "he rarely touched paper." He's clearly got some issues around reading things on a shelf, and he articulates that through references to fairly-tales, forests, and other highly metaphoric, moralizing stories. 

The point is that Clay's character develops through his descriptions of things, particularly what he compares those things to. His emphasis on big bad forests with mean wolves and witches from Transylvania suggest that he hasn't really developed much maturity around experiences and doesn't really have the language to describe unknowns or unreasonable fears. At the same time, he really likes California and sees it as a safe space--which is weird when on considers that California, and the Hollywood we associated with it, is responsible for our modern conception of  "big bad forests with mean wolves and witches from Transylvania." The references to California also serve to reinforce his connection, at least in the beginning, with the technological optimism of Silicon Valley. In short, readers are being set up to believe that Clay is afraid of books (with their stories about "big bad forests with mean wolves and witches from Transylvania," but admires Google (California).

These similes and metaphors (symbols!) also keeps us--readers--implicated in the story as we wait to see how he will sort all this out. The book uses Clay's connections to objects, his descriptions of setting, objects, people, and his characterizations of his emotional responses to "make meaning."

---

Phew, let's tackle something a little more straightforward: genre. The important thing to remember about genre is conventions--how a particular genre signals--or represents--conventions. We know what a novel is because we understand the conventions of the genre, same with poetry, or a television sitcom, or a detective story. Sometimes, genres are about the *type* of text we are reading: a novel, a poem, a play. Sometimes, genres respond the other literary terms such as character, atmosphere, or even generalized conventions. Detective fiction is a *genre* in that it has conventions we expect to see when we read it--namely a detective and, usually, a dead body. A fairy tale is a genre often signalled by the words "once upon a time." Point is, we have expectations for what we are reading that are based on the conventions we perceive when we arrive at the text. 

We might refer to these conventions as "normative." The conventions are what we expect in a "normal" novel, poem, character, setting, symbol, etc. One way to do literary analysis is to look at how texts assert--or resist--convention and what that does for how the text "makes meaning." For example, a stop sign that was painted green instead of red and had the word "GO" written inside it but still stood at an intersection might give some of us pause. Are we meant to stop? It looks like a stop sign, but it's the wrong colour. Can I roll through? What's coming the other way? Is there a stop sign the other way, or one of these signs? In short, the issue with a green-GO stop sign is that it defies convention--it still has the octagonal shape and position we expect from a stop sign (the convention), but the colour and the words are unexpected, and it throws us. The normative function of the stop sign (to make us stop) is thrown into chaos by the challenge to convention (the green and the word "GO"). 

STOP SIGN GO PNG

We always want to think about what the normative symbol means--what we think the character is trying to represent, or what the setting is referring to, or how the story is using objects. Once we do that, we can better see how the text might be playing with those conventions, or being ambiguous about the meaning of those conventions, or how the object signals those conventions. In short, we're looking both at how the literary text has objects (things, characters, settings, words) *like* things we know about in the real world, things we *expect* to see, and has objects--sometimes the same as we expect, sometimes not--that *are not like* things we know in the real world, or things we *expect* to see. 

Genre is an important term because it helps us lay out what our expectations are so that we can better discuss how the text "makes meaning" by taking our expectations into account. The text might play with those conventions or distort them, or offer "non-normative" representations in order to foreshadow, make a point, keep us in suspense, take us in the wrong direction, or to enlighten us about the very expectations we might not recognize we have. 

If we take *Mr. Penumbra's 24-Hour Bookstore* as an example, it is a pretty conventional novel. In fact, it signals many conventions: it's quest narrative (like many epic poems, it recounts a journey), it's a coming of age story (again, a journey from ignorance to understanding), it's a mystery novel (what are all those characters reading?), it's a romance (will Clay get together with Kat?). At the same time, it defies some of these conventions by emphasizing technology, youth-culture, and unexpected outcomes. What we need to figure out, and discuss, is why is defies those conventions and how the text comments on the "normative" world by giving us an imaginary one. 

You might want to think about some of the following going forward to the next module:

- Who is left out of *Mr. Penumbra's 24-Hour Bookstore*? How does the text play into conventions of representation by leaving out character types (by race, gender, or sex)?
- What language does the text use when representing technological things? What adjectives surround these technological objects? How do these words correspond to the current normative language about technology we see in the real world (on TV, the internet, in an Apple store)? 


