One of the interesting things about *The Thrilling Adventures of Lovelace and Babbage* is how it unapologetically reinvents historical events to represent some interesting questions about computers--or computation--and some of the assumptions we make about the representation of characters who interact with computers. The story draws a lot from erased histories about the [role of women](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Women_in_computing) in the early phases of computer history. 

One of the themes we should be thinking about this week--and it's a doozy--is erasure. Another related theme is "the other." In both cases, these themes reflect a "normative" situation and the way that "normative" situation often excludes or "erases" things that it does not recognize. 

Normative means the prevailing cultural current or, if you want to be more basic about it, that which we accept as normal (in the sense that the majority would acknowledge it as such). For instance, representations of heterosexual love is "normative" in that most people accept that representation as the "normal" way for love to be represented. However, this representation excludes and erases all other forms of love. Our job as conscientious readers is to think about the implications of our assumptions about what is "normal." For instance, we should think about how histories are erased when we track our "progress" through time. There's an old saying that "history is written by the winners." That phrase encapsulates to some extent the erasure of the loser when it comes to recording and representing the past. One of the things that *The Thrilling Adventures of Lovelace and Babbage* does is try to restore these erased histories, albeit through a fiction. 

At the same time, normative situations necessarily create opposition because who wants to accept the status quo. As a result, literary and cultural criticism has contextualized this fact by thinking about "the other" or that which stands in opposition to the normative (whatever it might be). So, in the case of *The Thrilling Adventures of Lovelace and Babbage*, there are several instances of "othering." One is that the text is a comic and not a novel or poem. Maybe you didn't expect that in an English Literature course? If not, then the text itself is an "other"; you might think less of the text because it is a comic book, or feel it is easier to read. In these cases, the novel or poem would be the normative, and the comic book the "other." While the text does not erase anything, the expectations for the "other" are set by our expectations of what is normal. 

Moreover, *The Thrilling Adventures of Lovelace and Babbage* works to restore the history of women in comics, offers numerous rigorous footnotes, and deep dives into all sorts of Victorian themes contrasting these themes with assumptions common to our own time and to our own sense of the historical record. In so doing, the comic represents a lot of what we might call "otherness" or "erasure." What we need to do is ask a lot of questions about what's missing, what assumptions are being played with, and what are our expectations for a text such as this?

Finally, for now, we want to think about how our assumptions are formed and what it means to be "other" or "erased," particularly when we think about Stuart Hall's "resistant reading." For instance, how might an "othered" or "erased" population respond to texts that attempt to erase or exclude them? How do they inset themselves in the representation? Where? Why? To what end? 

There's some pretty interesting examples to play with here, but some might be put this way:

- Erasure in labour: how do we erase the labour that produces the goods we consume? Do you know who made your cell phone, the food you eat, the car you drive, the gasoline that powers it? 
- Erasure in education: what groups are excluded from educational narratives--what do we learn and why? Indigenous peoples have largely been excluded from histories of Canada or they have only been understood *in reference to* Anglo-Saxon histories. Why might this be an issue? How do we deal with it? 
- Women as "other": next week, we'll look more closely at this concept, but suffice to say: how does *The Thrilling Adventures of Lovelace and Babbage* write in a female history where there isn't one? How does it deal with Victorian representations of women--which often positioned female characters as "savage" or crazy, hysterical, and gossipers, incapable of reasonable thought, only out for marriage.